README.md, before:

# Console Operator

An operator for OpenShift Console.

The console-operator installs and maintains the web console on a cluster.

## Run on a 4.0.0 Cluster

The console operator is installed by default and will automatically maintain a console.  

## Development Setup

* Install Go 1.15.2 -- https://golang.org/dl/
* GVM is recommended but not required -- https://github.com/moovweb/gvm
  * On MacOS you may need to execute `go env -w GO111MODULE=auto` after installing the main go binary before you can install other versions via GVM

## Clone the Repo & Build Locally

To avoid some of the standard quirks of `gopath`, the recommended way to clone and 
work with this repository is to do the following:

### Cloning the Repo

Rather than ~/go for everything, provide separate gopaths. For this example we will
use $HOME/gopaths as the root of our projects and consoleoperator as our project directory.


```bash 
mkdir -p $HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator
``` 

Now get the repository from github.

```bash 
cd $HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator
export GOPATH=`pwd`
go get github.com/openshift/console-operator
```

You may see a message like `package github.com/openshift/console-operator: no Go files in $HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator/src/github.com/openshift/console-operator`
and you can safely ignore it.

You may now add your fork to the repo as a remote.
```bash
cd src/github.com/openshift/console-operator/
git remote rename origin upstream
git remote add origin {Your fork url}
```

### Gopath

Note that we created `$HOME/gopaths`.  This implies that each project will have
its own gopath, so you will need to set that while working:

```bash 
export GOPATH=$HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator
``` 

If you have multiple goprojects and don't want to fuss with maintaining this when
you `cd` to different projects, give [this script](https://www.jtolio.com/2017/01/magic-gopath/)
a try. It will add a command called `calc_gopath` to your `prompt_command` and 
set your gopath appropriately depending on the current working directory.

(At some point `golang` will fix `$GOPATH` and this won't be necessary)

### Development & Building the Binary

Running the `make` command will build the binary:

```bash 
make 
```

The binary output will be:

```bash 
./_output/local/bin/<os>/<arch>/console
```

You may want to add this to your path or symlink it:

```bash 
# if your ~/bin is in your path:
ln -s ./_output/local/bin/<os>/<arch>/console ~/bin/console 
```

However, it is no longer recommended to run the operator locally.  Instead, you 
should be building a docker image and deploying it into a development cluster.
Continue below for instructions to do this with a reasonable feedback loop.

### Verify Source Code

Test `gofmt` and other verification tools:

```bash 
make verify
```

Let `gofmt` automatically update your source:

```bash 
gofmt -w ./pkg
gofmt -w ./cmd 
```

### Run Unit Tests

```bash
make test-unit
```

It is suggested to run `integration` and `e2e` tests with CI.  This is automatic when opening a PR.


### Development Against a 4.0 Dev Cluster 

The approach here is to build & deploy your code in a new container on a development cluster.  Don't 
be put off by the need to redeploy your container, this is intended to provide a quick feedback loop.

#### Create a Cluster
To develop features for the `console-operator`, you will need to run your code against a dev cluster.
The `console-operator` expects to be running in a container.  It is difficult to fake a local 
environment, and the debuggin experience is not like debugging a real container.  Instead, do the following 
to set yourself up to build your binary & deploy a new container quickly and frequently.

Visit [https://try.openshift.com/](https://try.openshift.com/), download the installer and create 
a cluster.  [Instructions](https://cloud.openshift.com/clusters/install) (including pull secret) 
are maintained here.

```bash
# create a directory for your install config
# aws is recommended
mkdir ~/openshift/aws/us-east
cd ~/openshift/aws/us-east
# generate configs using the wizard
openshift-install create install-config
# then run the installer to get a cluster 
openshift-install create cluster --dir ~/openshift/aws/us-east --log-level debug
```

If successful, you should have gotten instructions to set `KUBECONFIG`, login to the console, etc.

#### Shut down CVO & the Default Console Operator

We don't want the default `console-operator` to run if we are going to test our own. Therefore, do 
the following:

```bash
# Instruct CVO to stop managing the console operator
# CVO's job is to ensure all of the operators are functioning correctly
# if we want to make changes to the operator, we need to tell CVO to stop caring.
oc apply -f examples/cvo-unmanage-operator.yaml
# Then, scale down the default console-operator 
oc scale --replicas 0 deployment console-operator --namespace openshift-console-operator
```
Note that you can also simply delete the CVO namespace if you want to turn it off completely (for all operators).

Now we should be ready to build & deploy the operator with our changes.

#### Preparation to Deploy Operator Changes Quickly

Typically to build your binary you will use the `make` command:

```bash
# this will build for your platform:
make
# if you are running OSX, you will need to build for linux doing something like:
OS_DEBUG=true OS_BUILD_PLATFORMS=linux/amd64 make
# note that you can build for mulitiple platforms with:
make build-cross
```
But the `make` step is included in the `Dockerfile`, so this does not need to be done manually.
You can instead simply build the container image and push the it to your own registry:

```bash 
# the pattern is:
docker build -t <registry>/<your-username>/console-operator:<version> .
# following: docker.io/openshift/origin-console-operator:latest
# for development, you are going to push to an alternate registry.
# specifically it can look something like this:
docker build -f Dockerfile.rhel7 -t quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest .
```
You can optionally build a specific version.

Then, push your image:

```bash 
docker push <registry>/<your-username>/console-operator:<version>
# Be sure your repository is public else the image will not be able to be pulled later
docker push quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest
```
Then, you will want to deploy your new container.  This means duplicating the `manifests/07-operator.yaml`
and updating the line `image: docker.io/openshift/origin-console-operator:latest` to instead use the
image you just pushed.

```bash
# duplicate the operator manifest to /examples or your ~/ home dir
cp manifests/07-operator.yaml ~/07-operator-alt-image.yaml
```
Then, update the image & replicas in your `07-operator-alt-image.yaml` file:

```yaml
# before
replicas: 2
image: docker.io/openshift/origin-console-operator:latest
# after 
# image: <registry>/<your-username>/console-operator:<version>
replicas: 1
image: quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest
```
And ensure that the `imagePullPolicy` is still `Always`.  This will ensure a fast development feedback loop. 

```yaml
imagePullPolicy: Always
```

#### Deploying 

At this point, your pattern will be 

- Change code
- Build a new docker image
    - This will automatically & implicitly `make build` a new binary
- Push the image to your repository
- Delete the running `console-operator` pod
    - This will cause the Deployment to pull the image again before deploying a new pod

Which looks like the following:

```bash
# build binary + container
docker build -t quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest .
# push container
docker push quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest
# delete pod, trigger a new pull & deploy
oc delete pod console-operator --namespace openshift-console-operator
```
Docker containers are layered, so there should not be a significant time delay in between your pushes.

#### Manifest changes

If you are making changes to the manifests, you will need to `oc apply` the manifest.

#### Debugging 

```bash
# inspect the clusteroperator object
oc describe clusteroperator console
# get all events in openshift-console-operator namespace
oc get events -n openshift-console-operator
# retrieve deployment info (including related events)
oc describe deployment console-operator -n openshift-console-operator
# retrieve pod info (including related events)
oc describe pod console-operator-<sha> -n openshift-console-operator
# watch the logs of the operator pod (scale down to 1, no need for mulitple during dev)
oc logs -f console-operator-<sha> -n openshift-console-operator
# exec into the pod
 oc exec -it console-operator-<sha> -- /bin/bash
```

## Tips

If you don't know where your `kubeconfig` is due to running against multiple clusters this can be handy:

```bash 
# just a high number
oc whoami --loglevel=100
# likely output will be $HOME/.kube/config 
``` 
If you need to know information about your cluster:

```bash
# this will list all images, associated github repo, and the commit # currently running.
# very useful to see if the image is running current code...or not.
oc adm release info --commits
# get just the list of images & sha256 digest
oc adm release info
# coming soon...
oc adm release extract 
```
## Quick Starts

See the [Quick Starts README](quickstarts/README.md) for contributing console
quick starts.

Commit message:

OCPBUGS-55425: Make the description for the docker build up to date with up to date files, update the file name of the example CO manifest referenced in the how to steps

README.md, after:

# Console Operator

An operator for OpenShift Console.

The console-operator installs and maintains the web console on a cluster.

## Run on a 4.0.0 Cluster

The console operator is installed by default and will automatically maintain a console.  

## Development Setup

* Install Go 1.15.2 -- https://golang.org/dl/
* GVM is recommended but not required -- https://github.com/moovweb/gvm
  * On MacOS you may need to execute `go env -w GO111MODULE=auto` after installing the main go binary before you can install other versions via GVM

## Clone the Repo & Build Locally

To avoid some of the standard quirks of `gopath`, the recommended way to clone and 
work with this repository is to do the following:

### Cloning the Repo

Rather than ~/go for everything, provide separate gopaths. For this example we will
use $HOME/gopaths as the root of our projects and consoleoperator as our project directory.


```bash 
mkdir -p $HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator
``` 

Now get the repository from github.

```bash 
cd $HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator
export GOPATH=`pwd`
go get github.com/openshift/console-operator
```

You may see a message like `package github.com/openshift/console-operator: no Go files in $HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator/src/github.com/openshift/console-operator`
and you can safely ignore it.

You may now add your fork to the repo as a remote.
```bash
cd src/github.com/openshift/console-operator/
git remote rename origin upstream
git remote add origin {Your fork url}
```

### Gopath

Note that we created `$HOME/gopaths`.  This implies that each project will have
its own gopath, so you will need to set that while working:

```bash 
export GOPATH=$HOME/gopaths/consoleoperator
``` 

If you have multiple goprojects and don't want to fuss with maintaining this when
you `cd` to different projects, give [this script](https://www.jtolio.com/2017/01/magic-gopath/)
a try. It will add a command called `calc_gopath` to your `prompt_command` and 
set your gopath appropriately depending on the current working directory.

(At some point `golang` will fix `$GOPATH` and this won't be necessary)

### Development & Building the Binary

Running the `make` command will build the binary:

```bash 
make 
```

The binary output will be:

```bash 
./_output/local/bin/<os>/<arch>/console
```

You may want to add this to your path or symlink it:

```bash 
# if your ~/bin is in your path:
ln -s ./_output/local/bin/<os>/<arch>/console ~/bin/console 
```

However, it is no longer recommended to run the operator locally.  Instead, you 
should be building a docker image and deploying it into a development cluster.
Continue below for instructions to do this with a reasonable feedback loop.

### Verify Source Code

Test `gofmt` and other verification tools:

```bash 
make verify
```

Let `gofmt` automatically update your source:

```bash 
gofmt -w ./pkg
gofmt -w ./cmd 
```

### Run Unit Tests

```bash
make test-unit
```

It is suggested to run `integration` and `e2e` tests with CI.  This is automatic when opening a PR.


### Development Against a 4.0 Dev Cluster 

The approach here is to build & deploy your code in a new container on a development cluster.  Don't 
be put off by the need to redeploy your container, this is intended to provide a quick feedback loop.

#### Create a Cluster
To develop features for the `console-operator`, you will need to run your code against a dev cluster.
The `console-operator` expects to be running in a container.  It is difficult to fake a local 
environment, and the debuggin experience is not like debugging a real container.  Instead, do the following 
to set yourself up to build your binary & deploy a new container quickly and frequently.

Visit [https://try.openshift.com/](https://try.openshift.com/), download the installer and create 
a cluster.  [Instructions](https://cloud.openshift.com/clusters/install) (including pull secret) 
are maintained here.

```bash
# create a directory for your install config
# aws is recommended
mkdir ~/openshift/aws/us-east
cd ~/openshift/aws/us-east
# generate configs using the wizard
openshift-install create install-config
# then run the installer to get a cluster 
openshift-install create cluster --dir ~/openshift/aws/us-east --log-level debug
```

If successful, you should have gotten instructions to set `KUBECONFIG`, login to the console, etc.

#### Shut down CVO & the Default Console Operator

We don't want the default `console-operator` to run if we are going to test our own. Therefore, do 
the following:

```bash
# Instruct CVO to stop managing the console operator
# CVO's job is to ensure all of the operators are functioning correctly
# if we want to make changes to the operator, we need to tell CVO to stop caring.
oc apply -f examples/cvo-unmanage-operator.yaml
# Then, scale down the default console-operator 
oc scale --replicas 0 deployment console-operator --namespace openshift-console-operator
```
Note that you can also simply delete the CVO namespace if you want to turn it off completely (for all operators).

Now we should be ready to build & deploy the operator with our changes.

#### Preparation to Deploy Operator Changes Quickly

Typically to build your binary you will use the `make` command:

```bash
# this will build for your platform:
make
# if you are running OSX, you will need to build for linux doing something like:
OS_DEBUG=true OS_BUILD_PLATFORMS=linux/amd64 make
# note that you can build for mulitiple platforms with:
make build-cross
```
But the build step is included in the `Dockerfile.rhel7`, so this does not need to be done manually.
You can instead simply build the container image and push it to your own registry:

```bash 
# the pattern is:
docker build -f Dockerfile.rhel7 -t <registry>/<your-username>/console-operator:<version>
# conforming to: docker.io/openshift/origin-console-operator:latest
# for development, you are going to push to an alternate registry.
```
Note: If you are running on macOS, you need to pass the --platform linux/amd64 flag to the Docker build command.

Then, push your image:

```bash 
docker push <registry>/<your-username>/console-operator:<version>
# Be sure your repository is public else the image will not be able to be pulled later
docker push quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest
```
Then, you will want to deploy your new container to the cluster. This can be done by updating the `image` field in the `example/07-operator.yaml` file to instead use the image you just pushed:

```yaml
# before
image: docker.io/openshift/origin-console-operator:latest
# after 
# image: <registry>/<your-username>/console-operator:<version>
image: quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest
```
Note: To guarantee a fast development feedback loop make sure the `imagePullPolicy` is set to `Always`. 

#### Deploying 

At this point, your pattern will be 

- Change code
- Build a new docker image
    - This will automatically & implicitly `make build` a new binary
- Push the image to your repository
- Delete the running `console-operator` pod
    - This will cause the Deployment to pull the image again before deploying a new pod

Which looks like the following:

```bash
# build binary + container
docker build -t quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest .
# push container
docker push quay.io/benjaminapetersen/console-operator:latest
# delete pod, trigger a new pull & deploy
oc delete pod console-operator --namespace openshift-console-operator
```
Docker containers are layered, so there should not be a significant time delay in between your pushes.

#### Manifest changes

If you are making changes to the manifests, you will need to `oc apply` the manifest.

#### Debugging 

```bash
# inspect the clusteroperator object
oc describe clusteroperator console
# get all events in openshift-console-operator namespace
oc get events -n openshift-console-operator
# retrieve deployment info (including related events)
oc describe deployment console-operator -n openshift-console-operator
# retrieve pod info (including related events)
oc describe pod console-operator-<sha> -n openshift-console-operator
# watch the logs of the operator pod (scale down to 1, no need for mulitple during dev)
oc logs -f console-operator-<sha> -n openshift-console-operator
# exec into the pod
 oc exec -it console-operator-<sha> -- /bin/bash
```

## Tips

If you don't know where your `kubeconfig` is due to running against multiple clusters this can be handy:

```bash 
# just a high number
oc whoami --loglevel=100
# likely output will be $HOME/.kube/config 
``` 
If you need to know information about your cluster:

```bash
# this will list all images, associated github repo, and the commit # currently running.
# very useful to see if the image is running current code...or not.
oc adm release info --commits
# get just the list of images & sha256 digest
oc adm release info
# coming soon...
oc adm release extract 
```
## Quick Starts

See the [Quick Starts README](quickstarts/README.md) for contributing console
quick starts.
